docs: Guidance for binding outbound SMTP with multiple interfaces available (#3465)
docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver: docs/content/config/advanced/tips/server-multiple-ip-addresses.md

> ---
> title: 'Advanced | Tips | Server with multiple IP-addresses'
> ---
> 
> ## Server with multiple IP-addresses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
title: 'Use Cases | Binding DMS to a specific network'
hide:
  - toc
---
```

No need to repeat the title :)

Also added extra metadata to disable the right-side navigation menu as that's not needed for this page.

> !!! warning "Advice not extensively tested"
> 
>     This configuration has only been used with `network: host`, where you have direct access to the host interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! warning "Advice not extensively tested"

    This configuration advice is a community contribution which has only been verified as a solution when using `network: host`, where you have direct access to the host interfaces.

    It may be applicable in other network modes if the container has control of the outbound IPs to bind to. This is not the case with bridge networks that typically bind to a private range network for containers which are bridged to a public interface via Docker.
```

If your host system is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, you probably have an interest to
bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-addresses to ensure MX records are aligned with

> PTR-records in DNS when sending emails to avoid getting blocked by SPF for example.

Author: Maybe the phrase about SPF should be more clear:

bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-addresses to ensure MX records are aligned with PTR and SPF records in DNS when sending (and receiving emails).

You expect at least the resolving IP-addresses from the MX records in DNS to have reverse DNS (PTR records) matching the MX records. 
And those IP-addresses for sending emails need to be specified in the SPF records in DNS. (should be correct for bounces etc as well, so affects receiving as well?) 

Agree @polarathene ?

Reviewer: I don't think the PTR records have to match MX records since that's only related to where mail should be delivered/received for that domain.

IIRC, when this type of check is done, it's not necessarily strict, it's usually acceptable to resolve the sending mail-server shares the same IP as the PTR record and the address it points to are the same.

Example setup:
- DMS server + config:
  - PTR `1.2.3.4` => `example.com`
  - A `example.com` => `1.2.3.4`
  - A `mail.example.com` => `1.2.3.4`
  - `compose.yaml` with hostname `mail.example.com` + `setup email add hello@example.org`
- DNS support for mail account `hello@example.org` (_mail accounts don't need to share the same domain or server as DMS_):
  - A `example.org` => `5.6.7.8` (_not important to DMS_)
  - MX `example.org` => `mail.example.com` (_Mail sent to `example.org` will be handled by DMS, not relevant to example below_)
  - TXT (SPF) `example.org` =>`"v=spf1 mx ip4:1.2.3.4 a:mail.example.com -all"` (_only the `mx` should be necessary, but could alternatively specify an IP address authorized to send mail on behalf of `example.org`, that IP address could implicitly be resolved for an `A` record lookup too if the `MX` of `example.org` is not appropriate_)

MTA connection example:
1.When connecting to another MTA to send mail to (_with sender `hello@example.org`_), DMS will greet the MTA with HELO / EHLO of `mail.example.com`.
2. The MTA we are sending the mail to (_eg: belonging to a recipient, or is a relay service_) may do a PTR lookup for the IP that `mail.example.com` points to (`1.2.3.4`), which the PTR record resolves to `example.com`, which in turn resolves back to `1.2.3.4`, same as DMS at `mail.example.com`, pass ✔️ 
3. SPF record can also be checked, verifying that `example.org` authorizes `mail.example.com` (_or in this case anything sending from that IP_).

I may be mistaken if I'm recalling the above incorrectly. But the `PTR` check is tied to DMS hostname (_that Postfix gets configured for_), like with the TLS certificate, the trust is in the mail-server here, the sender address is not relevant (_separately checked via DNS lookup for records like SPF that authorize DMS server to send_).

Reviewer: So perhaps it should be advising in the docs here to match the IP that `hostname` (`compose.yaml`) would resolve to via DNS?

> If your host system is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, you probably have an interest to
> bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-addresses to ensure MX records are aligned with
> PTR-records in DNS when sending emails to avoid getting blocked by SPF for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Docker host is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, it may be beneficial to bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-address / interface. When a mail is sent outbound from DMS, it greets the MTA it is connecting to with a EHLO (DMS FQDN) which might be verified against the IP resolved, and that a `PTR` record for that IP resolves an address back to the same IP. If DMS connections are inconsistent with the IP used here, these DNS checks are likely to fail.
```

[`reject_unknown_sender`](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/issues/3716#issuecomment-1868033234) is a setting DMS has which other mail servers may also check for, where a foreign sender address is checked for having a valid DNS MX or A record. The linked issue is an SPF failure related to that.

There are two related restrictions Postfix can configure related to the suggestion that other MTAs may also check for.

> [**`reject_unknown_reverse_client_hostname`**](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#reject_unknown_reverse_client_hostname):
> **Reject** the request when the **client IP address** has **no address -> name mapping**.
> This is a weaker restriction than the [`reject_unknown_client_hostname`](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#reject_unknown_client_hostname) feature, which requires not only that the **address -> name** and **name -> address** mappings exist, but _also_ that **the two mappings reproduce the client IP address**.

---

SPF only comes into play when it authorizes a mail server via `mx` / `ip4` / `ip6` / `a` etc, as [demonstrated in my prior review comment](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/pull/3465/files#r1294061262). Likewise those DNS records related changes would need to have consistent IP.

> This can be configured by [overriding the default Postfix configurations](../override-defaults/postfix.md) DMS provides. Create `postfix-master.cf` and `postfix-main.cf` files for your config volume (`docker-data/dms/config`).
> 
> In `postfix-main.cf` you'll have to set the [`smtp_bind_address`](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address) and [`smtp_bind_address6`](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6)
> to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be configured by [overriding the default Postfix configurations][docs::overrides-postfix] DMS provides. Create `postfix-master.cf` and `postfix-main.cf` files for your config volume (`docker-data/dms/config`).

In `postfix-main.cf` you'll have to set the [`smtp_bind_address`][postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv4] and [`smtp_bind_address6`][postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv6]
to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.

[docs::overrides-postfix]: ../override-defaults/postfix.md
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv4]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv6]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6
```

> In `postfix-main.cf` you'll have to set the [smtp_bind_address](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address) and [smtp_bind_address6](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6)
> to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `postfix-main.cf` you'll have to set the [`smtp_bind_address`](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address) and [`smtp_bind_address6`](https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6)
to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.
```

!!! example

    ```title="postfix-main.cf"

>     smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.10
>     smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.42
    smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::42
```

    ```

>     **NOTE:** IP-addresses shown above are placeholders, using reserved documentation IP-addresses by IANA, [RFC-5737](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc5737/) and [RFC-3849](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **NOTE:** IP addresses shown above are placeholders, they are IP addresses reserved for documentation by IANA (_[RFC-5737 (IPv4)][rfc-5737] and [RFC-3849 (IPv6)][rfc-3849]_). Replace with the IP addresses you want DMS to send mail through.
    
[rfc-5737]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5737
[rfc-3849]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849
```

> !!! info "IP-addresses shown below are reserved documentation IP-addresses by IANA, [RFC-5737](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc5737/) and [RFC-3849](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849)."
> 
> Example `postfix-main.cf`:
> 
> ```
> smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.10
> smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::10
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
!!! example

    ```title="postfix-main.cf"
    smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.10
    smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::10
    ```

    **NOTE:** IP-addresses shown above are placeholders, using reserved documentation IP-addresses by IANA, [RFC-5737](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc5737/) and [RFC-3849](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849).
````

> One problem with using `smtp_bind_address` is that the default configuration for `smtp-amavis` in
> DMS needs to be updated to explicitly connect via loopback (localhost), which avoids using
> the `smtp_bind_address` as source address when "forwarding" email for filtering via Amavis.
> 
> !!! example
> 
>     ```title="postfix-master.cf"
>     smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
>     smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    !!! bug "Inheriting the bind from `main.cf` can misconfigure services"

        One problem when setting `smtp_bind_address` in `main.cf` is that it will be inherited by any services in `master.cf` that extend the `smtp` transport. One of these is `smtp-amavis`, which is explicitly configured to listen / connect via loopback (localhost / `127.0.0.1`).

        A `postfix-master.cf` override can workaround that issue by ensuring `smtp-amavis` binds to the expected internal IP:

        ```title="postfix-master.cf"
        smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
        smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
        ```
```

> !!! example
> 
>     ```title="postfix-master.cf"
>     smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
>     smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
>    ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
!!! example

    ```title="postfix-master.cf"
    smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
    smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
    ```
````

> One problem with using `smtp_bind_address` is that the default configuration for `smtp-amavis` in
> DMS needs to be updated & explicit configured to connect via loopback (localhost) to avoid using
> the `smtp_bind_address` as source address when "forwarding" email for filtering via amavis.
> This seems to be a better configuration than adding your bind-addresses to `mynetworks` configuration in
> Postfix.
> 
> Example `postfix-master.cf`:
> 
> ```
> smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
> smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
One problem with using `smtp_bind_address` is that the default configuration for `smtp-amavis` in
DMS needs to be updated to explicitly connect via loopback (localhost), which avoids using
the `smtp_bind_address` as source address when "forwarding" email for filtering via Amavis.

!!! example

    ```title="postfix-master.cf"
    smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
    smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
   ```

This seems to be a better approach than adding your bind-addresses to `mynetworks` parameter in
Postfix `postfix-main.cf`.
````

> 
> This seems to be a better approach than adding your bind-addresses to `mynetworks` parameter in
> Postfix `postfix-main.cf`.
> 

Reviewer: Postfix `mynetworks` is for trusted networks (we manage with `PERMIT_DOCKER`, not really what interface to use as source for outbound connections. No need to bring it up as an alternative.

```suggestion
```

If your Docker host is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, it may be beneficial to bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-address / interface. When a mail is sent outbound from DMS, it greets the MTA it is connecting to with a EHLO (DMS FQDN) which might be verified against the IP resolved, and that a `PTR` record for that IP resolves an address back to the same IP. If DMS connections are inconsistent with the IP used here, these DNS checks are likely to fail.

This can be configured by [overriding the default Postfix configurations][docs::overrides-postfix] DMS provides. Create `postfix-master.cf` and `postfix-main.cf` files for your config volume (`docker-data/dms/config`).

In `postfix-main.cf` you'll have to set the [`smtp_bind_address`][postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv4] and [`smtp_bind_address6`][postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv6]
to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.

[docs::overrides-postfix]: ../override-defaults/postfix.md
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv4]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv6]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6

> !!! example
> 
>     ```title="postfix-main.cf"
>     smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.42
>     smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::42
>     ```
> 
>     **NOTE:** IP addresses shown above are placeholders, they are IP addresses reserved for documentation by IANA (_[RFC-5737 (IPv4)][rfc-5737] and [RFC-3849 (IPv6)][rfc-3849]_). Replace with the IP addresses you want DMS to send mail through.
>     
> [rfc-5737]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5737
> [rfc-3849]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849
> 
>     !!! bug "Inheriting the bind from `main.cf` can misconfigure services"
> 
>         One problem when setting `smtp_bind_address` in `main.cf` is that it will be inherited by any services in `master.cf` that extend the `smtp` transport. One of these is `smtp-amavis`, which is explicitly configured to listen / connect via loopback (localhost / `127.0.0.1`).
> 
>         A `postfix-master.cf` override can workaround that issue by ensuring `smtp-amavis` binds to the expected internal IP:
> 
>         ```title="postfix-master.cf"
>         smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
>         smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
>         ```

Reviewer: Using Content Tabs feature to share the alternative (unverified) discussed during review: https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/pull/3465#issuecomment-1678107233

```suggestion
!!! example

    === "Contributed solution"

        ```title="postfix-main.cf"
        smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.42
        smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::42
        ```

        !!! bug "Inheriting the bind from `main.cf` can misconfigure services"

            One problem when setting `smtp_bind_address` in `main.cf` is that it will be inherited by any services in `master.cf` that extend the `smtp` transport. One of these is `smtp-amavis`, which is explicitly configured to listen / connect via loopback (localhost / `127.0.0.1`).

            A `postfix-master.cf` override can workaround that issue by ensuring `smtp-amavis` binds to the expected internal IP:

            ```title="postfix-master.cf"
            smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
            smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
            ```

    === "Alternative (unverified)"

        During review of the contribution, it was identified that a better solution might be to [explicitly set the `smtp_bind_address` override on the `smtp` transport service][gh-pr::3465] instead:

        ```title="postfix-master.cf"
        smtp/inet/smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.42
        smtp/inet/smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::42
        ```

        If that avoids the concern with `smtp-amavis`, you may still need to additionally override for the [`relay` transport][gh-src::postfix-master-cf::relay-transport] as well if you have configured DMS to relay mail.

!!! note "IP addresses for documentation"

    IP addresses shown in above examples are placeholders, they are IP addresses reserved for documentation by IANA (_[RFC-5737 (IPv4)][rfc-5737] and [RFC-3849 (IPv6)][rfc-3849]_). Replace them with the IP addresses you want DMS to send mail through.
    
[rfc-5737]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5737
[rfc-3849]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3849
[gh-pr::3465]: https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/pull/3465#issuecomment-1678107233
[gh-src::postfix-master-cf::relay-transport]: https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/9cdbef2b369fb4fb0f1b4e534da8703daf92abc9/target/postfix/master.cf#L65
```

---
title: 'Use Cases | Binding DMS to a specific network'
hide:
  - toc
---

!!! warning "Advice not extensively tested"

    This configuration advice is a community contribution which has only been verified as a solution when using `network: host`, where you have direct access to the host interfaces.

    It may be applicable in other network modes if the container has control of the outbound IPs to bind to. This is not the case with bridge networks that typically bind to a private range network for containers which are bridged to a public interface via Docker.

> If your Docker host is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, it may be beneficial to bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-address / interface. When a mail is sent outbound from DMS, it greets the MTA it is connecting to with a EHLO (DMS FQDN) which might be verified against the IP resolved, and that a `PTR` record for that IP resolves an address back to the same IP. If DMS connections are inconsistent with the IP used here, these DNS checks are likely to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Docker host is running multiple IPv4 and IPv6 IP-addresses, it may be beneficial to bind outgoing SMTP connections to specific IP-address / interface.

- When a mail is sent outbound from DMS, it greets the MTA it is connecting to with a EHLO (DMS FQDN) which might be verified against the IP resolved, and that a `PTR` record for that IP resolves an address back to the same IP.
- If DMS connections are inconsistent with the IP used here, these DNS checks are likely to fail.
```

to the respective IP-address on the server you want to use.

[docs::overrides-postfix]: ../override-defaults/postfix.md
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv4]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address
[postfix-docs::smtp-bind-address-ipv6]: https://www.postfix.org/postconf.5.html#smtp_bind_address6

!!! example

    === "Contributed solution"

        ```title="postfix-main.cf"
        smtp_bind_address = 198.51.100.42
        smtp_bind_address6 = 2001:DB8::42
        ```

        !!! bug "Inheriting the bind from `main.cf` can misconfigure services"

            One problem when setting `smtp_bind_address` in `main.cf` is that it will be inherited by any services in `master.cf` that extend the `smtp` transport. One of these is `smtp-amavis`, which is explicitly configured to listen / connect via loopback (localhost / `127.0.0.1`).

            A `postfix-master.cf` override can workaround that issue by ensuring `smtp-amavis` binds to the expected internal IP:

            ```title="postfix-master.cf"
            smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address=127.0.0.1
            smtp-amavis/unix/smtp_bind_address6=::1
            ```

    === "Alternative (unverified)"

>         During review of the contribution, it was identified that a better solution might be to [explicitly set the `smtp_bind_address` override on the `smtp` transport service][gh-pr::3465] instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        A potentially better solution might be to instead [explicitly set the `smtp_bind_address` override on the `smtp` transport service][gh-pr::3465]:
```
